---
title: Nextflow on the Road — ISMB 2024 in Montreal
episode: 42
description: Conference highlights and team impressions from ISMB 2024.
date: 2024-07-23
type: podcast
subtype: Community
youtubeid: G1_gsn3i2wk
image: /img/podcast_ep42.png
tags: Nextflow, Seqera, conference
author: Developer advocates
icon: logo_podcast_channels.jpg
---

A small but intrepid team of Seqerans recently attended the ISMB 2024 conference in Montreal, a great mix of computational biology and bioinformatics with a largely academic / research-focused audience. Join Geraldine Van der Auwera, Rob Syme and Florian Wuennemann for a lively discussion about the scientific themes of the conference, their experience running a booth, meeting with the ISMB and BOSC community, and resources for job seekers.

<!-- end-archive-description -->

# Podcast overview

## Scientific themes / Favorite talks and takeaways
    1. AI is everywhere! And actually starting to produce useful results, bubble notwithstanding.
    2. Pangenomes are cool. 
    3. Multimodal data (graphs, spatial, etc) is cool too!
    4. Francesco Lescai’s talk in the BioInfo-Core track was awesome (slight bias from the Nextflowers here)

## Running the Nextflow/Seqera booth
    1. We got tons of visitors to the booth! Interesting bimodal distribution of current Nextflow users + newcomers interested in moving to Nextflow.
    2. Interesting questions about what is Seqera, what does the platform do, how does the business work given its OSS foundation.
    3. We ran a raffle that required visitors to run a Nextflow pipeline for a chance to win a pair of AirPods. (A PhD student won the AirPods, which made us very happy.)

## Sponsoring the BOSC track/COSI
    1. We were the Platinum sponsor for BOSC (Bioinformatics Open Source Conference) which used to be a separate event and is now co-organized as a COSI track of ISMB. The sponsorship mostly funds travel for people who otherwise couldn’t attend the conference.
    2. We made special limited edition Nextflow-BOSC socks! 
    3. BOSC is awesome and you should join them next year at ISMB 2025 in Liverpool.

## Jobs!
    1. We met a lot of early-career job seekers at the ISMB career fair and shared some advice & recommendations
        - Get engaged in nf-core / learn + demonstrate skills
        - Check out the jobs channels in the nf-core and nextflow slack workspaces
    2. Bioinformatics job postings increasingly cite Nextflow experience as a desired or even required skill
        - Follow us on Twitter or LinkedIn for a weekly roundup of Nextflow-related job postings 
    3. Our Community team will be looking for a new EU-based developer advocate in the near future; reach out to [Geraldine on LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/geraldine-van-der-auwera-5a5811/) if you're interested. 

# Upcoming events mentioned in the podcast

- [Sep 16-20 : GA4GH Plenary Meeting](https://broadinstitute.swoogo.com/ga4gh-12th-plenary/) (Melbourne, Australia)
- [Oct 28 — Nov 1: Nextflow Summit](https://summit.nextflow.io/2024/barcelona/) (Barcelona, Spain + online) (+ nf-core hackathon and newcomer training)
- [Nov 5-9: ASHG](https://www.ashg.org/meetings/2024meeting/) (Denver, CO, USA)
